New Hampshire Ball Bearings, Inc (NBB) v. W. Scott Jackson and another.

	In digital forensics and cyber law the legal landscape is still forming, and many precedents are being established as we move forward.  The case that will be reviewed here is New Hampshire Ball Bearings, Inc (henceforth NBB). v. W. Scott JACKSON and another.  This case was heard by the Supreme Court of New Hampshire, and the opinion was issued on March 18, of 2009.  This case is relevant to cybersecurity and digital forensics in that it established that warrants for servers, drives, computers, and other equipment in cases of enterprise law must be specific or proven to have intent to those devices.  The types of digital forensics used in this case are forensic imaging, log review, hashing, and hex analysis.  The case is interesting from a forensic point of view because there were several devices utilized to establish not only culpability but the case for the prosecution.  This is to be an insight into the case, documenting the judges rulings, offering insight and opinions on the effect it will have on the landscape of digital forensics (henceforth DIFR), and the methods utilized to establish the precedents mentioned.
	First I believe it’s necessary to understand that in the discovery portion of the case the judge established and followed precedent to limit the discovery to certain parts of infrastructure, devices, and personal hardware.  This is due to the tech and time debt that would be incurred by the defendant and his firm to do a full forensic imaging of all of their servers, backups, and devices.  It was ruled that the request was “too broad and burdensome” [1].  This is also, I feel, a level of court expediency.  Since once the drives and backups were received there would likely have been continuance request from the prosecution to allow for proper analysis and expert review of all findings. This in turn, would have caused the court case to run much longer than necessary.  The courts however were limiting the request based off of precedent and establishing further the right of the court to do so.  The cases used to establish this precedent in the past were, Maynard & Maynard, 155 N.H (2007), Guyotte v. O’Neill, 157 N.H. (2008), Blagbrough *360 Family Realty Trust v. A&T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. (2007).  In the opinion of the NBB v. Scott JACKSON case the court outlines the reasoning that the judge in this case was justified in subsection III. Discovery.  The company, NBB, attempted to image all 250 computers, every server, and all backups of the defendant’s new firm Sargent.  The finding of the court is that this would be “unnecessarily disrupted to [Sargent’s] operations.”[1]  Hence they limited the scope to 35 employee computers, all of their backup tapes and servers.  Sargent did not comply with the ruling though entirely, instead they went back to the court and requested that their servers not be included in discovery.  It was so ruled, and thus further established the scope of the investigation.
	The scope of the investigation is important to us as forensic analysts, since the scope of discovery not only defines our ability to find information, but it also establishes hard timelines for analysis.  These timelines being dictated by the time to create the backups, then the time it takes to analyze the logs, and ensure that the information isn’t missed in the analysis.  Also hashing tools, and hex analysis takes time to break establish time stamps, access logs, and to check and see what things may have been deleted, lost, or fragmented in the time since the departure of JACKSON from NBB.  This scope also becomes a bit of a contention point in the trial.  Though it saves time and defines the investigation, NBB feels they were slighted in not only access, but in not being allowed to inform the jury of the restrictions to access.  While this may be true in a court case, the fact is the restriction is important in a forensic investigation.  Pouring over servers, access logs, backups, and the personal devices of JACKSON would create a very difficult and time-consuming analysis.  It is also worth noting that discovery was limited to search terms agreed to before the devices were turned over.  The search terms also made it so that only files which fit the profile for the investigation were found, thus disallowing cross-contamination from Sargent’s own work.  
	The forensic analysis completed started based on a training program for an analyst.  The individual was given JACKSON’s computer to create a forensic backup of it as a part of a forensic training course.  This copy was later analyzed, and it was found that periphery devices had been attached to the computer, which allowed data to be transferred off of it.  There was however an issue.  The NBB equipment operator failed to follow proper forensic procedures and didn’t use a write blocker when imaging.  As such some files had the last access dates changed, which in turn could compromise the investigation.  It is imperative that when one does any work in forensics you must write block and ensure that nothing you do taints the drive or the files in any way.  This was, in my opinion, one of the greatest issues with the prosecutions case.  The analysis continued to show that on Jan 29, after JACKSON returned from a meeting with Sargent he twice remotely accessed NBB’s VPN, and serially accessed a number of files on the NBB laptop.  The VPN access lasted only minutes which JACKSON testified was due to him only checking email.  Experts agreed this was likely the case, they also continued to state that serial access occurs when multiple files are accessed at the same time, thus updating the access dates / times for those files.  There were two different theories as to the serial access.  One was that these files were copied (NBB), and the other is that the files were simply moved or selected (Sargent).  This couldn’t be determined, but NBB identified around 53 files from the serially accessed list that contained data which was consistent with classified or confidential trade secrets.  The analysis also determined that there was a Lexar flash drive connected to the machine during the evening of the 29th. All of this is what prompted the suit to begin with.  Once this was all established JACKSON alleged that he removed only personal files from his laptop once he decided to resign.  However, two documents were found to have been taken from NBB and created and opened on the flash-drive as excel spreadsheets.  NBB’s expert alleged that the subsequent activity on the flash-drive made it too difficult to determine if any other files may have been copied from NBB.  This is all in part due to the nature of the drives themselves, as well as the fact that they were not immediately taken and copied as this was an after the fact allegation and suit.  This was perhaps the second issue with the case.
	The Jackson laptop in this case is another point of pain.  It, before being turned over, was analyzed to have had files deleted, large amounts of data moved, and a defrag / clean up process run.  These things, though not by themselves forensic countermeasures, would in essence make it very difficult to work through a complete analysis of any drive.  Jackson’s wife testified that she regularly ran the disk functions to keep her computer running smooth and quick, but analysis found that the processes had only been run twice in two years.  The inconsistencies in the story are a red flag, but one the Jury deemed not important.  Also noted that the entire trial predicated on forensic evidence was still largely circumstantial and ultimately mishandled by both sides.  This trial civilly was decided for the defense, and upon appeal was never overturned.
	In closing the entire case established the right of a judge to determine scope of discovery and analysis.  It allowed for several concessions due to the viewed unfair request of complete access from NBB to Sargent’s servers.  The case was in my opinion not valid due to the access dates of some files being potentially altered due to the write block not being utilized during the initial imaging.  This, in my opinion, should have rendered all findings of the forensic examination as not permissible.  The judge, however, allowed the findings and the suit to continue.  NBB’s analysts offered some opinions on how the trade secret documents were accessed, copied, and then obfuscated by the defense.  Ultimately, they did not meet the burden of proof as determined by a jury of peers.  They also did not, in my opinion, do enough work on their own servers to determine what was accessed and copied.  The trial itself was straight forward, with little else to offer, except for recalling precedent to establish evidence rules, process for discovery, and process for jury instruction.  While it’s not the most groundbreaking of cases for digital forensics, it does show a few different points of pain in the rapidly growing field, where many things are still being decided.  This case, is one of many which will shape our field moving forward, and is further proof of why there needs to be lawyers who understand technology as more than just a mouse, keyboard, and data entry platform.
















Source:
1.) Supreme Court of New Hampshire, New Hampshire Ball Bearings, INC. v. W. Scott JACKSON and another.  No. 2008-073, Decided March 18, 2009.
